---
layout: post
title: Makefile tutorial 2.0
categories: [tutorials]
info:
    title: Makefile tutorial 2.0
    description: The new and improved Makefile tutorial, for beginners and intermediates alike. Topics covered include pattern matching, compiling from and to different directories, header dependencies, and variables.
    image: https://noahloomans.com/assets/tutorials/makefile/preview.jpg
lang: en
---

The new and improved Makefile tutorial, for beginners and intermediates alike.
Topics covered include pattern matching, compiling from and to different
directories, header dependencies, and variables.

<p class="notice" markdown="1">

Translations: **English** \| [français](/tutorials/makefile.fr) | [Português (Brasil)](/tutorials/makefile.pt-br)

</p>

**Assumed knowledge**:
 - Basic POSIX shell proficiency. Including environment variables.
 - Basic GCC arguments. Including `-c`, `-o`, and `-W`.
 - Basic C, knows the difference between an executable, object files,
   source files, and header files.

## The basics

<div class="chapter" markdown="1" data-chapter="basic">

It's highly recommend for anyone reading this to follow along. Get started by
cloning this repo:

```sh
git clone https://noahloomans.com/tutorials/makefile
```

This repository includes the following `Makefile`:

```makefile
foo: main.o greeter.o
	gcc -o foo main.o greeter.o

main.o: main.c
	gcc -c -Wall -Wextra -Werror -o main.o main.c

greeter.o: greeter.c
	gcc -c -Wall -Wextra -Werror -o greeter.o greeter.c
```

This Makefile consists of 3 _rules_. A rule consists of a _target_, any
amount of _prerequisites_, and finally a _recipe_. The syntax is as follows:

```makefile
target: prerequisites
	recipe
```

A rule describes how `make` can make something. The first rule with a _target_
of `foo` describes how we can link together our executable. The second & third
rules describe how to compile the individual object files.

When you run `make foo`, make will look for a rule which can compile `foo`, in
this case the first rule. Before executing the _recipe_, make will first figure
out if the _recipe_ needs to be run at all, and if any other rules need to be
executed first. Make first checks if every individual _prerequisite_ exists and
is up-to-date.

The `main.o` _prerequisite_ will not exist on the first run. Make will look
through the rules to find one with a compatible _target_. In this case this is
the `main.o` rule. For this rule, the same process will start over again, as if
you ran `make main.o`. Make sees that `main.c` exists and `main.o` does not. It
will therefor compile `main.o` by executing the _recipe_. If however, `main.o`
were to already be present, then make would compare the edit dates. If `main.c`
is more recent than `main.o`, make will act as if `main.o` does not exist, and
recompile it.

On the first run, the same thing would happen for `greeter.o`.

> **Exercise**: Compile the `foo` binary using make. Then compile it again. Now,
> change `main.c` a bit and compile `foo` again. Take note of what commands make
> executes.

> **Question**: You ran `make foo` 3 times, during which instances did
> `greeter.o` get compiled?
>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-basic" id="chapter-basic-1" value="wrong-1">
> <label for="chapter-basic-1">All 3 instances</label><br>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-basic" id="chapter-basic-2" value="wrong-2">
> <label for="chapter-basic-2">The first and third</label><br>
> <!-- Yes, I know you can just read out the value to see which one is correct. -->
> <!-- The point of these questions isn't to be secure. -->
> <!-- These questions are just here so that you need to think about what you just learned. -->
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-basic" id="chapter-basic-3" value="correct">
> <label for="chapter-basic-3">Only the first</label><br>

<div class="explain-wrong" data-for="wrong-1 wrong-2" style="display: none;" markdown="1">

**Wrong!** Make only executes a _recipe_ if **either** of the following
conditions is matched:

- There exists no file called _target_
- _target_ exists, but one of the _prerequisites_ is newer

During the first instance, all _recipes_ will be executed. During the second
instance, no _recipe_ will be executed as all _targets_ already exist and all
_prerequisites_ are older than the _targets_. During the third instance, only
`main.o` and `foo` got compiled. Because `greeter.o` was newer than `greeter.c`,
no attempt to recompile `greeter.o` was made.

</div>

</div>

## Variables and pattern matching

<div class="chapter" markdown="1" data-chapter="pattern-matching" data-prerequisite="basic">

Writing a new rule for every object file is cumbersome and error-prone. One
can write the previous `Makefile` much cleaner like this:

```makefile
foo: main.o greeter.o
	gcc -o $@ $^

%.o: %.c
	gcc -c -Wall -Wextra -Werror -o $@ $^
```

This Makefile functions exactly[^1] the same as the first Makefile.

[^1]: One minor difference, the second rule will now match _any_ `.o` file,
      not just `main.o` and `greeter.o`.

The `%.o` rule will now handle the compilation of all object files. The `%` is
a pattern match. This is what the GNU Makefile manual says about pattern
matching, in [10.5.4 How Patterns Match](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Pattern-Match):

> A target pattern is composed of a ‘%’ between a prefix and a suffix, either or
> both of which may be empty. The pattern matches a file name only if the file
> name starts with the prefix and ends with the suffix, without overlap. The
> text between the prefix and the suffix is called the stem. Thus, when the
> pattern ‘%.o’ matches the file name test.o, the stem is ‘test’. The pattern
> rule prerequisites are turned into actual file names by substituting the stem
> for the character ‘%’. Thus, if in the same example one of the prerequisites
> is written as ‘%.c’, it expands to ‘test.c’.

That was quite a blob of text, let's give an example. When make tries to
search for a rule to compile `main.o` with, it will match the pattern. The
_stem_, `main`, is then injected in `%.c` to become `main.c`. Effectively, make
will pretend that the _target_ is `main.o` and the _prerequisite_ is `main.c`.
The same is true for `greeter.o`, and any other file ending in `.o`. Note that
`%` is not a preprocessor statement. This all happens during runtime, and
therefor also works on files which have never been referenced in the Makefile.

The new version of our Makefile also contains two so-called
_automatic variables_. Namely `$@` and `$^`. These variables allow us to write
generic _recipes_ that work with pattern matched rules. `$@` resolves to the
_target_ and `$^` resolves to all of the _prerequisites_.

> **Question**: There is an additional `stray.c` included in the example repo.
> Using the above Makefile, what would happen if we were to execute
> `make stray.o`?
>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-pattern-matching" id="chapter-pattern-matching-1" value="wrong-1">
> <label for="chapter-pattern-matching-1"><code>make: *** No rule to make target 'stray.o'.  Stop.</code></label><br>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-pattern-matching" id="chapter-pattern-matching-2" value="wrong-2">
> <label for="chapter-pattern-matching-2">Make compiles <code>stray.o</code> and links it into <code>foo</code></label><br>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-pattern-matching" id="chapter-pattern-matching-3" value="correct">
> <label for="chapter-pattern-matching-3">Make compiles <code>stray.o</code> and does nothing else</label><br>

<div class="explain-wrong" data-for="wrong-1" style="display: none;" markdown="1">

**Wrong!** The `%` is not a preprocessor statement. When you write
`make stray.o`, make will check each rule, one by one, to see if they can make
`stary.o`. The rule with a _target_ of `%.o` is able to make `stray.o`.

</div>

<div class="explain-wrong" data-for="wrong-2" style="display: none;" markdown="1">

**Wrong!** While `stray.o` will be compiled, the `foo` rule will never be
executed. The `foo` rule will only be used by make if you explicitely write
`make foo`, or if you just write `make` on its own, which causes make to use the
first rule.

</div>


</div>

## Variables

<div class="chapter" markdown="1" data-chapter="variables" data-prerequisite="pattern-matching">

Until now we wrote things like the list of object files and which flags gcc
takes inline. This is fine for small Makefiles, but let's clean it up a bit:

```makefile
NAME := foo
OBJFILES := main.o greeter.o
LDFLAGS ?=
CFLAGS ?= -Wall -Wextra -Werror

$(NAME): $(OBJFILES)
	$(CC) $(LDFLAGS) -o $@ $^

%.o: %.c
	$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $^
```

The variables set with `:=` are always set unconditionally. Variables set with
`?=` are only set if it hasn't been set already. Make inherits variables from
environment variables. This allows us to easily run make with custom `CFLAGS`
by, for example, running the following in your shell:

```sh
# Compile the program in debug mode (-g), and don't stop compiling on
# warnings.
CFLAGS="-Wall -Wextra -g" make
```

The `CC` variable is a bit special in that it is [pre-defined] to `cc`. The idea
is simple, if you write standards-compliant code, why should you specify with
which compiler to compile your code with? `cc` is the default C compiler on most
systems, and if the user wants your program to be compiled with a different
compiler, they can set the `CC` variable:

```sh
# Use the clang compiler and compile with the clang specific
# -fsanitize=address option to detect memory corruption.
export CC=clang
export CFLAGS="-Wall -Wextra -g -fsanitize=address"
export LDFLAGS="-g -fsanitize=address"
make
```

[pre-defined]: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Implicit-Variables

> **Note:** You may also see the `=` operator being used in Makefiles you find
> in the wilderness. This is also correct, but functions in a slightly
> different way from `:=`. For the differences, see
> [the official documentation].

[the official documentation]: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Flavors

</div>

## Folders

<div class="chapter" markdown="1" data-chapter="folders" data-prerequisite="pattern-matching">

With the Makefiles used until now, all source files and object files are
littered in the root of the repository. One can make a repository a lot more
organized by putting them in separate folders.

Let's take a look at our object file rule again:

```makefile
%.o: %.c
	$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $^
```

The `%` pattern doesn't just work on suffixes, it works on prefixes as well. We
can use this to compile our object files to a different folder from our source
files.

```makefile
# Compile object files in the obj folder from source files in the src
# folder.
obj/%.o: src/%.c
	$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $^
```

Note that make has no knowledge of directories here. All it does is look for
"obj/" at the start and ".o" at the end, and replaces those with "src/" at the
start and ".c" at the end. Because the `$@` and `$^` _automatic variables_
resolve to the processed forms, something like this will be executed:

```sh
cc -c -Wall -Wextra -Werror -o obj/example.o src/example.c
```

This won't quite work however, as the compiler won't create an `obj` folder if
it doesn't already exist. We can address this by running `mkdir -p` before `cc`,
which creates a directory if it does not already exist. To figure out which
directory to create, one can use [the `$(dir ...)` function][dir-function].

[dir-function]: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#File-Name-Functions

```makefile
obj/%.o: src/%.c
	@mkdir -p $(dir $@)
	$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $^
```

The `@` at the start is just a little aesthetic choice. It makes it so that all
these `mkdir` calls won't be printed. The output can be quite cluttered
otherwise.

Now to make this all work, we just need to make sure that anywhere we use an
object file as a _prerequisite_ we reference them with their `obj/` prefix,
otherwise make won't be able to find them. Our `Makefile` now looks like this:

```makefile
NAME := foo
OBJFILES := obj/main.o obj/greeter.o
LDFLAGS ?=
CFLAGS ?= -Wall -Wextra -Werror

$(NAME): $(OBJFILES)
	$(CC) $(LDFLAGS) -o $@ $^

obj/%.o: src/%.c
	@mkdir -p $(dir $@)
	$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $^
```

> **Further reading**: You can avoid writing the `obj/` prefix every time using
> [6.3.1 Substitution References](https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Substitution-Refs).

> **Question**: Imagine that all of our `.c` files had an `ft_` prefix, and
> were in the `src` folder. So our main source file would be `src/ft_main.c`.
> How can we make object files for them **without** the `ft_` prefix? So that
> `src/ft_main.c` would get compiled to the `obj/main.o` object file?
>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-folders" id="chapter-folders-1" value="correct">
> <label for="chapter-folders-1">Change the object file rule to <code>obj/%.o: src/ft_%.c</code></label><br>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-folders" id="chapter-folders-2" value="wrong-1">
> <label for="chapter-folders-2">Change the last line to <code>$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ ft_$^</code></label><br>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-folders" id="chapter-folders-3" value="wrong-2">
> <label for="chapter-folders-3">Change the object file rule to <code>obj/ft_%.o: src/%.c</code></label><br>

<div class="explain-wrong" data-for="wrong-1" style="display: none;" markdown="1">

**Wrong!** If you tell `cc` to compile from the `ft_$^`, it will end up trying
to use a file like `ft_src/example.c`. The file used as input should _always_
be the same file as listed in the _prerequisite_.

</div>

<div class="explain-wrong" data-for="wrong-2" style="display: none;" markdown="1">

**Wrong!** The bit before the colon is the _target_. The file we are compiling
to. The `ft_` should be part of the source file, which is listed after the
colon. When you try to make the `obj/main.o` file, make will match that with the
`obj/%.o` rule. The _stem_ will be `main`, which make then inserts into the
_prerequisite_. So if we have `src/ft_%.c` as our _prerequisite_, make insert
the stem into that and look for `src/ft_main.c`.

</div>

</div>

## Cleaning up

<div class="chapter" markdown="1" data-chapter="clean" data-prerequisite="folders">

Until now, all of our Makefile rules actually make something, as defined by the
_target_. This is almost always what we want, but there are a few exceptions.
Take `make clean` for example. In most Makefiles[^2], such a rule will cleanup
all the files the Makefile created. This is what a naïve implementation would
look like:

```makefile
NAME := foo
OBJFILES := obj/main.o obj/greeter.o
LDFLAGS ?=
CFLAGS ?= -Wall -Wextra -Werror

$(NAME): $(OBJFILES)
	$(CC) $(LDFLAGS) -o $@ $^

obj/%.o: src/%.c
	@mkdir -p $(dir $@)
	$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $^

clean:
	rm -f $(NAME) $(OBJFILES)
```

The issue with this is that make will now think that our `clean` rule has a
target file named `clean`. Let me illustrate why is this a problem:

```sh
$ touch clean
$ make clean
make: 'clean' is up to date.
```

Make did not want to execute the `clean` rule, because a file named `clean`
already exists. To fix this, we need to declare the `clean` target to be a
phony. Make has a magic `.PHONY` target, all the _prerequisites_ of this
_target_ are marked as phonies, and make will no longer check them against any
file with the same name. Instead make will assume phonies are always out of
date, and need to be recompiled. This gives us the following `Makefile`:

```makefile
NAME := foo
OBJFILES := obj/main.o obj/greeter.o
LDFLAGS ?=
CFLAGS ?= -Wall -Wextra -Werror

$(NAME): $(OBJFILES)
	$(CC) $(LDFLAGS) -o $@ $^

obj/%.o: src/%.c
	@mkdir -p $(dir $@)
	$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $^

clean:
	rm -f $(NAME) $(OBJFILES)

.PHONY: clean
```

> **Question**: Imagine that our `.PHONY` rule was defined like this:
> `.PHONY: clean $(NAME)`. We run `make` twice. What would happend the
> second time?
>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-clean" id="chapter-clean-1" value="wrong-1">
> <label for="chapter-clean-1">The entire project is recompiled & relinked.</label><br>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-clean" id="chapter-clean-2" value="wrong-2">
> <label for="chapter-clean-2">Nothing is recompiled, nor relinked.</label><br>
> <input type="radio" name="chapter-clean" id="chapter-clean-3" value="correct">
> <label for="chapter-clean-3">Nothing is recompiled, but <code>foo</code> is relinked.</label><br>


[^2]: Note that the `clean` rule for the Makefiles we write at 42 schools
      work slightly differently.

<div class="explain-wrong" data-for="wrong-1" style="display: none;" markdown="1">

**Wrong!** While `foo` is relinked, it is not recompiled as `.PHONY` only
applies to the _rules_ directly referenced, and not the _prerequisites_ of those
rules.

</div>

<div class="explain-wrong" data-for="wrong-2" style="display: none;" markdown="1">

**Wrong!** Since `$(NAME)` is a _prequisite_ of `.PHONY`, make always considers
it out-of-date, and is therefore relinked everytime we run `make`.

</div>

</div>

## Finishing touches

<div class="chapter" markdown="1" data-chapter="header" data-prerequisite="clean">

There are two more things which are nice to have in our Makefile. First of,
right now recompiling our project using `make` won't quite work if you modified
a header file, as make is unaware of those.

This easiest way is to tell make that every object file also depends on every
header file. That would look like this:

```makefile
NAME := foo
HEADERFILES := src/greeter.h
OBJFILES := obj/main.o obj/greeter.o
LDFLAGS ?=
CFLAGS ?= -Wall -Wextra -Werror

$(NAME): $(OBJFILES)
	$(CC) $(LDFLAGS) -o $@ $^

obj/%.o: src/%.c $(HEADERFILES)
	@mkdir -p $(dir $@)
	$(CC) -c $(CFLAGS) -o $@ $<
```

We made three changes. First we added a `HEADERFILES` variable which contains a
list of header files, then we added it as a _prerequisite_ to the `obj/%.o`
rule, and finally, we changed the second `$^` to a `$<`.

Our `obj/%.o` rule now has multiple _prerequisites_: The corrosponding `src/%.c`
file and all header files defined in `HEADERFILES`. Because make checks if any
_prequisite_ is newer than the _target_, the _target_ will be recompiled
whenever a header file updates. This same check will be executed for every
object file rule, causing all of them to be recompiled.

The `$^` and `$<` _automatic variables_ are different in a subtile but
important way: `$^` resolves to all of the _prerequisites_, while `$<` just
resolves to the first one. In our case, that means that `$<` ignores the header
files and just expands to our source file. This is exactly what we want since
the our compiler shouldn't be told what the header files are directly.

</div>

## Closing words

<div class="chapter" markdown="1" data-chapter="end" data-prerequisite="folders">

That was it, I hope you found my Makefile tutorial useful! Big thanks to
[Pepijn Holster](https://github.com/Eathox) for helping me write this, and
thanks to everyone who helped me proof read.

**Want to translate this tutorial?** I will gladly accept translations! Shoot
me an email at {{ site.email_markdown }}, or DM me on Slack at `nloomans` if you
are a student who is part of the 42 Network. I'll help you get started.

</div>

---

<style>
input + label {
	cursor: pointer;
}
input:checked + label {
	font-weight: bold;
}

input[value="correct"]:checked + label {
	color: var(--color-success);
}

input[value="correct"]:checked + label::after {
	content: " [correct]";
}

input[value^="wrong-"]:checked + label {
	color: var(--color-failure);
}

input[value^="wrong-"]:checked + label::after {
	content: " [incorrect]";
}
</style>
<script>
const namespace = "markdown-tutorial-v2";
const chapters = document.querySelectorAll(".chapter");

function restoreAnswers() {
	for (let chapter of chapters) {
		const chapterID = chapter.dataset.chapter;
		const answer = window.localStorage.getItem(`${namespace}-chapter-${chapterID}`);
		if (answer !== null) {
			chapter.querySelector(`input[value="${answer}"]`).checked = true;
		}
	}
}

function checkAnswers() {
	for (let chapter of chapters) {
		const chapterID = chapter.dataset.chapter;
		const checked = document.querySelector(`input[name="chapter-${chapterID}"]:checked`);
		if (checked === null) {
			continue;
		}

		window.localStorage.setItem(`${namespace}-chapter-${chapterID}`, checked.value);
	}

	updateDocument();
}

function displayExplainer(chapter, wrongAnswer) {
	const explainers = chapter.querySelectorAll(".explain-wrong");
	for (let explainer of explainers) {
		explainer.style.display = "none";
	}

	if (wrongAnswer !== null) {
		const explainerToShow = chapter.querySelector(`.explain-wrong[data-for~="${wrongAnswer}"]`);
		explainerToShow.style.display = "block";
	}
}

function updateDocument() {
	for (let chapter of chapters) {
		const parent = chapter.parentElement;
		const chapterID = chapter.dataset.chapter;
		const prerequisite = chapter.dataset.prerequisite;

		const answer = window.localStorage.getItem(`${namespace}-chapter-${chapterID}`);
		if (answer === "correct") {
			displayExplainer(chapter, null);
		} else {
			displayExplainer(chapter, answer);
		}

		if (prerequisite === undefined) {
			continue;
		}

		const answerOfPrerequisite = window.localStorage.getItem(`${namespace}-chapter-${prerequisite}`);
		if (answerOfPrerequisite === "correct") {
			const notice = document.querySelector(`#${namespace}-notice-${chapterID}`);
			if (notice !== null) {
				parent.removeChild(notice);
			}

			chapter.style.display = "block";
		} else {
			if (document.querySelector(`#${namespace}-notice-${chapterID}`) === null) {
				const notice = document.createElement("p");
				notice.id = `${namespace}-notice-${chapterID}`;
				notice.innerHTML = "<em>[complete above exercise to view]</em>";
				parent.insertBefore(notice, chapter);
			}

			chapter.style.display = "none";
		}
	}
}

restoreAnswers();
updateDocument();
document.querySelectorAll('.chapter input[type="radio"]')
	.forEach(input => input.addEventListener("change", checkAnswers));
</script>
